
#### Formation of the Muslim League (1906)

* Muslim delegates from all over India met at Dacca for the Muslim Educational Conference.
* The Nawab Salimullah of Dacca proposed the setting up of an organisation to look after the Muslim interests. The proposal was accepted.
* The All-India Muslim League was finally set up on December 30, 1906.

Like the Indian National Congress, they conducted annual sessions and put their demands to the British government. Initially, they enjoyed the support of the British. Their first achievement was the separate electorates for the Muslims in the Minto-Morley reforms.

#### The Lucknow Pact (1916)
During the 1916 Congress session at Lucknow two major events occurred.
* The divided Congress became united.
* An understanding for joint action against the British was reached between the Congress and the Muslim League and it was called the Lucknow Pact.

The signing of the Lucknow Pact by the Congress and the Muslim League in 1916 marked an important step in the Hindu-Muslim unity.

#### The Home Rule Movement (1916)
Two Home Rule Leagues were established,
* one by B.G. Tilak at Poona in April 1916, and
* the other by Mrs. Annie Besant at Madras in September 1916

While Tilak’s Movement concentrated on Maharashtra, Annie Besant’s Movement covered the rest of the country.

The two Leagues cooperated with each other as well with the Congress and the Muslim League in putting their demand for home rule.

* The aim of the Movement was to get self-government for India within the British Empire.
* The Home Rule Movement had brought a new life in the national movement.
* There was a revival of Swadeshi.
* Women joined in larger numbers.

#### August Declaration
* On 20 August 1917, Montague, the Secretary of State in England, made a declaration in the Parliament of England on British Government’s policy towards future political reforms in India.
* He promised the gradual development of self-governing institutions in India.
* This August Declaration led to the end of the Home Rule Movement.

#### Revolutionary Movements
The revolutionaries were not satisfied with the methods of both the moderates and extremists. Hence, they started many revolutionary secret organizations.

The revolutionary groups sprang up mainly in Bengal, Maharashtra, Punjab and Madras.
* __Bengal__ : _'Anusilan Samiti'_ and _'Jugantar'_
* __Maharashtra__: _'Abhinava Bharat'_ (Savarkar brothers)
* __Madras Presidency__: _'Bharathmatha Association'_ (Nilakanta Bramachari)
* __Punjab__: Ajit Singh set up a secret society
* __London__: Shyamji Krishna Verma gathered young Indian nationalists like Madan Lal Dhingra, Savarkar, V.V.S. Iyer and T.S.S.Rajan
* __USA__: Lala Hardyal set up the ‘Ghadar Party’ in USA to organise revolutionary activities from outside India
