
### Lord Lytton (1876-1880)

#### Famine policy
* The famine of 1876-78 had affected fifty eight million people.
* The outbreak of cholera and fever added to the misery of the suffering population.
* Lytton’s Government failed miserably to tackle the situation. The government’s relief measures seemed to be inadequate.
* The first Famine Commission (1878-80)
    - recommendations include provision of funds for famine relief and construction work in the annual budget.
    - The Famine Code came into existence in 1883.

#### The Vernacular Press Act and the Arms Act (1878)
* Vernacular Press Act (1878)
    - This Act crushed the freedom of the Indian press.
    - empowered a Magistrate to secure an undertaking from the editor, publisher and printer of a vernacular newspaper that nothing would be published against the English Government
    - equipments of the press could be seized if the offence was committed
* Arms Act (1878)
    - prevented the Indians to keep arms without appropriate license.
    - Its violation would be a criminal offence.
    - The Europeans and the Anglo- Indians were exempted from the operation of these legislations.

#### Decentralisation of finance
- Lytton wanted to encourage the provinces in collecting the revenue and thereby strengthen the financial power and position of the provinces.
- The system of decentralisation of finance that had begun in the time of Lord Mayo was continued during the time of Lord Lytton.
- The provincial governments were empowered with some control over the expenditure of all provincial matters like land-revenue, excise, stamps, law and justice.

#### Free Trade Policy
* abolished many import duties and supported the Free Trade Policy
* This had seriously affected the Indian economic interest.

#### Other Reforms
* introduced uniform salt tax throughout British India
* In 1878, the Statutory Civil Service was established exclusively for Indians but this was abolished later.

---

#### The Afghan policy
* The Afghan policy of the British was based on the assumed threat of Russian invasion of India.
* The first Afghan War (1838-42) proved to be a disastrous one for the British in India.
* Lord Lytton was instructed by the home government to follow a forward policy.
* Lytton’s Afghan policy was severely crticised because he was responsible for the murder of the British officers including the Resident in Kabul after the Second Afghan War

#### Second Afghan War (1878-80)
* The Russian attempt to send a mission to Afghanistan was the main cause of the Second Afghan War.
* Soon after the outbreak of the war in 1878, the British troops captured the territory between Kabul and Kandahar.
* The ruler of Afghanistan, Sher Ali fled from his country and died in 1879.
* Sher Ali's son Yakub Khan became the ruler and the British concluded the Treaty of Gandamak with him.
* A British Resident was sent to Kabul but soon he was murdered along with other British officers by the Afghan rebels.
