
### Lord Curzon (1899-1905)

#### Educational Reforms
* In his view the universities had degenerated into factories for producing political revolutionaries.
* To set the educational system in order, he instituted a Universities Commission in 1902.
* On the basis of the recommendations of the Commission, Curzon brought in the Indian Universities Act of 1904, which brought all the universities in India under the control of the government.

#### Police and Military Reforms
* instituted a Police Commission in 1902 under the chairmanship of Sir Andrew Frazer
* Curzon accepted all the recommendations and implemented them
    - set up training schools for both the officers and the constables
    - introduced provincial police service

#### Calcutta Corporation Act (1899)
* strength of the elected members was reduced and that of the official members increased
* more representations to the English people as against the Indians in the Calcutta Corporation
* strong resentment by the Indian members against Curzon’s anti-people measures

#### Preservation of Archaeological objects
* No Viceroy in India before or after him took such a keen interest in archaeological objects.
* passed Ancient Monuments Act, 1904 which made it obligatory on the part of the government and local authorities to preserve the monuments of archaeological importance and their destruction an offence.

#### Partition of Bengal, 1905
* The new province of Eastern Bengal and Assam included the whole of Assam and the Dacca, Rajshahi and Chittagong divisions of Bengal with headquarters at Dacca.
* Curzon justified his action on administrative lines
* However, partition divided the Hindus and Muslims in Bengal
* This led to the anti-partition agitation all over the country.
* This had also intensified the National Movement.
