
#### Course of Constitutional development
* The Regulating Act in 1773
    - The history of constitutional development in India begins from the passing of the Regulating Act in 1773.
* The Pitt’s India Act of 1784
* The successive Charter Acts from 1793 to 1853
    - 1793 The Charter Act
    - 1813 The Charter Act
    - 1833 The Charter Act
    - 1853 The Charter Act
* 1858 The Government of India Act
    - The Revolt of 1857 brought about important changes in the British administration in India. These changes were announced in the Government of India Act of 1858.
* 1861 The Indian Councils Act
* 1892 The Indian Councils Act
* 1909 The Indian Councils Act (Morley-Minto Reforms)
* 1919 The Government of India Act (Montague-Chelmsford Reforms)
* 1935 The Government of India Act

------

#### The Government of India Act of 1858
The Governemnt of India Act of 1858 was passed by the Parliament of England and received royal assent on 2nd August 1858.

The main provisions of the Act:
* East India Company’s rule came to an end and the Indian administration came under the direct control of the Crown.
* Establishment of Secretary of State for India
    - In England, the _Court of Directors_ and _Board of Control_ were abolished.
    - In place of the Court of Directors, came the __Secretary of State for India__ and _India Council_ were established. The Secretary of State would be a member of the British cabinet.
    - Sir Charles Wood was made the first Secretary of State for India. India Council consisting of 15 members would assist him.
* The Governor General of India was made the Viceroy of India. The first Viceroy of India was Lord Canning.
* All the previous treaties with Indian princes were accepted and honoured by the Act.

#### Queen’s Proclamation
?? ==> [01/05 Significance and Effects of the Mutiny]

---

#### The Indian Councils Act of 1861
* increased the number of members in the Governor-General’s executive Council from 4 to 5
* the Governor-General’s Executive Council was enlarged into a Central Legislative Council. Six to tweleve “additional members” were to be nominated by the Governor-General.
* Not less than half of these members were to be non-officials. Thus a provision was made for the inclusion of Indians in the Legislative Council.
* The functions of these members were strictly limited to making legislation and they were forbidden from interfering in the matters of the Executive Council. They did not possess powers of administration and finance.
* Legilative Councils were also established in the provinces. The number of additional members in the provinces was fixed between four to eight.

#### The Indian Councils Act of 1892
The Indian Councils Act of 1892 was the first achievement of the Indian National Congress.

* It had increased the number of “additional members” in the Central Legislative Council. They were to be not less than 10 and not more than 16.
* It had also increased the proportion of non-officials – 6 officials and 10 non-officials.
* The members were allowed to discuss the budget and criticize the financial policy of the government.
* In the provinces also the number of additional members was increased with additional powers.

#### Morley-Minto Reforms of 1909 (The Indian Councils Act of 1909)
* Lord Minto, the Governor-General (Viceroy) of India and Lord Morley, the Secretary of State for India
* It was passed to win the support of the Moderates in the Congress

Important provisions of this Act were:
* The number of “additional members” of the Central Legislative Council was increased to a maximum of 60. Elected members were to be 27 and among the remaining 33 nominated members not more than 28 were to be officials.
* Communal representation was introduced for the first time in the interests of Muslims. Separate electorates were provided for the Muslims.
* The number of members in provincial legislative councils of major provinces was raised to 50.
* The Councils were given right to discuss and pass resolutions on the Budget and on all matters of public interest. However, the Governor-General had the power to disallow discussion on the budget.
* An Indian member was appointed for the first time to the Governor-General’s Executive Council. Sir S. P. Sinha was- the first Indian to be appointed thus.
* In Bombay and Madras, the number of members of the Executive Councils was raised from 2 to 4. The practice of appointing Indians to these Councils began.
* Two Indians were also appointed to the India Council (in England).

_Significance of Morley-Minto Reforms:_
* The Morley-Minto reforms never desired to set up a parliamentary form of government in India.
* However, the Moderates welcomed the reforms as fairly liberal measures.
* The principle of separate electorates had ultimately led to the partition of India in 1947.

#### Montague-Chelmsford Reforms of 1919 (The Government of India Act of 1919)
* Lord Chelmsford was the Viceroy of India
* Montague, the Secretary of State for India made a declaration in the House of Commons assuring the introduction of responsible government in India in different stages.
* Montague-Chelmsford Reforms (Government of India Act of 1919) was the first measure towards this passed by the Parliament of England.

The main features of the Act were:
* Dyarchy was introduced in the provinces.
    - Provincial subjects were divided into “Reserved Subjects” and “Transferred Subjects”
    - The Reserved subjects were to be administered by the Governor and his Executive Council. The Transferred subjects by the Governor and his ministers.
    - Reserved Subjects included police, jails, land revenue, irrigation and forests.
    - Transferred Subjects included education, local self-government, public health, sanitation, agriculture and industries.
* A bicameral (Two Chambers) legislature was set up at the centre.
    - It consisted of the __Council of States__ and the __Legislative Assembly__.
    - In the Council of States there would be a maximum of 60 members out of which 34 were elected and the remaining nominated.
    - The total members in the Legislative Assembly was to be a maximum of 145, out of which 105 were to be elected and the remaining nominated.
* The salaries of the Secretary of State for India and his assistants were to be paid out of the British revenues. So far, they were paid out of the Indian revenues.
* A High Commissioner for India at London was appointed.

The most important defect in this Act was the ___division of powers___ under the system of _Dyarchy_ in the provinces.

#### The Government of India Act of 1935
The Government of India Act of 1935 was passed on the basis of:
* the report of the Simon Commission
* the outcome of the Round Table Conferences
* the White Paper issued by the British Government in 1933

This Act contained many important changes over the previous Act of 1919.  

Salient features of this Act were:
* Provision for the establishment of an All India Federation at the Centre, consisting of the Provinces of British India and the Princely States. (It did not come into existence since the Princely States refused to give their consent for the union.)
* Division of powers into three lists: Federal, Provincial and Concurrent.
* Introduction of _Dyarchy_ at the Centre.
    - The Governor-General and his councillors administered the “Reserved subjects”.
    - The Council of Ministers were responsible for the “Transferred subjects”.
* Abolition of Dyarchy and the introduction of Provincial Autonomy in the provinces.
    - The Governor was made the head of the Provincial Executive but he was expected to run the administration on the advice of the Council of Ministers.
    - Thus provincial government was entrusted to the elected Ministers. They were responsible to the popularly elected Legislative Assemblies.
* Provincial Legislatures of Bengal, Madras, Bombay, United Provinces, Bihar and Assam were made bicameral.
* Extension of the principle of Separate Electorates to Sikhs, Europeans, Indian Christians and Anglo Indians.
* Esatblishment of a Federal Court at Delhi with a Chief Justice and 6 judges.

_Significance:_
* The working of the provincial autonomy was not successful. The Governors were not bound to accept the advice of the ministers. In reality, the real power in the Provincial Government was with the Governor.
* But, despite these drawbacks in the scheme, the Congress decided to take part in the elections to the Provincial Legislatures with the consideration that it was an improvement over the previous Acts.
* In accordance with the provisions of the Government of India Act of 1935 elections to the Provincial Legislatures were held in February 1937.
* The Congress had virtually swept the polls. On 7 July 1937, after the Viceroy Lord Linlithgow, assured the Congress of his cooperation, the party formed its ministries in seven provinces.
