
#### Advent of Gandhi

Mahatma Gandhi made the nationalist movement a mass movement.
* born at Porbandar in Gujarat on 2 October 1869
* studied law in England; returned to India in 1891
* went to South Africa in 1893 and involved himself in the struggle against _'apartheid'_ (Racial discrimination against the Blacks) for twenty years
* finally, came to India in 1915 and fully involved himself in the Indian National Movement

#### Champaran Satyagraha (1917)
* Satyagraha against the oppressive European indigo planters at Champaran in Bihar in 1917.

#### Kheda Satyagraha (1918)
* Satyagraha at Kheda in Gujarat in support of the peasants who were not able to pay the land tax due to failure of crops.
* During this struggle, Sardar Vallabhai Patel emerged as one of the trusted followers of Gandhi.

#### Ahmedabad Mill Strike (1918)
* In 1918, Gandhi undertook a fast unto death for the cause of Ahmedabad Mill Workers
* Finally, the mill owners conceded the just demands of the workers.

On the whole, the local movements at Champaran, Kheda and Ahmedabad brought Mahatma Gandhi closer to the life of the people and their problems at the grass roots level. Consequently, he became the leader of the masses.

#### Rowlatt Act (1919)
* a committee was set up under the presidentship of Sir Sydney Rowlatt to look into the militant Nationalist activities
* On the basis of its report the Rowlatt Act was passed in March 1919 by the Central Legislative Council.
* As per this Act:
    - any person could be arrested on the basis of suspicion.
    - No appeal or petition could be filed against such arrests.

_Indian opposition:_
* This Act was called the Black Act and it was widely opposed.
* Mahatma Gandhi was arrested near Delhi.
* Two prominent leaders of Punjab, Dr. Satya Pal and Dr. Saifuddin Kitchlew, were arrested in Amritsar.

#### Jallianwala Bagh Massacre (13 April, 1919)
* In Punjab, there was an unprecedented support to the Rowlatt Satyagraha.
* The Government of Punjab handed over the administration to the military authorities under General Dyer.
* General Dyer banned all public meetings and detained the political leaders.
* On 13th April, the Baisakhi day (harvest festival), a public meeting was organized at the Jallianwala Bagh (garden). Dyer marched in and without any warning opened fire on the crowd.
* According to official report 379 people were killed and 1137 wounded in the incident.
* nation-wide protest against this massacre
* Rabindranath Tagore renounced his knighthood as a protest

#### Khilafat Movement
* The chief cause of the Khilafat Movement was the defeat of Turkey in the First World War.
* The harsh terms of the Treaty of Sevres (1920) was felt by the Muslims as a great insult to them.
* The whole movement was based on the Muslim belief that the Caliph (the Sultan of Turkey) was the religious head of the Muslims all over the world.
* The Muslims in India were upset over the British attitude against Turkey and launched the Khilafat Movement.

Maulana Abul Kalam Azad, M.A. Ansari, Saifuddin Kitchlew and the Ali brothers were the prominent leaders of this movement.

Mahatma Gandhi was particularly interested in bringing the Hindus and the Muslims together to achieve the country’s independence. Subsequently, the Khilafat Movement merged with the Non-Cooperation Movement launched by Mahatma Gandhi in 1920.

#### Non-Cooperation Movement (1920-1922)
The programmes of the Non-Cooperation Movement were:
* Surrender of titles and honorary positions.
* Resignation of membership from the local bodies.
* Boycott of elections held under the provisions of the 1919 Act.
* Boycott of government functions
* Boycott of courts, government schools and colleges
* Boycott of foreign goods
* Establishment of national schools, colleges and private panchayat courts
* Popularizing swadeshi goods and khadi

_Course of the Movement:_
* The movement began with Mahatma Gandhi renouncing the titles, which were given by the British. Other leaders and influential persons also followed.
* Legislatures were boycotted. No leader of the Congress came forward to contest the elections for the Legislatures.
* Students came out of the government educational institutions. National schools such as the 'Kashi Vidyapeeth', the 'Bihar Vidyapeeth' and the 'Jamia Millia Islamia' were set up.
* The message of _'Swadeshi'_ spread everywhere. Most of the households took to weaving cloths with the help of _'charkhas'_.

_Churi Chaura incident:_
* the whole movement was abruptly called off on 11th February 1922 by Gandhi following the Churi Chaura incident in the Gorakpur district of U.P.
* Earlier on 5th February an angry mob set fire to the police station at Churi Chaura and twenty two police men were burnt to death.

#### Significance of the Non-Cooperation Movement
* It was the real mass movement with the participation of different sections of Indian society such as peasants, workers, students, teachers and women.
* It witnessed the spread of nationalism to the remote corners of India.
* It also marked the height of Hindu-Muslim unity as a result of the merger of Khilafat movement.
* It demonstrated the willingness and ability of the masses to endure hardships and make sacrifices.
