
#### Swaraj Party
The suspension of the Non-Cooperation Movement led to a split within Congress in the Gaya session of the Congress in December 1922.

Leaders like Motilal Nehru and Chittranjan Das (C.R. Das) formed a separate group within the Congress known as the Swaraj Party on 1 January 1923.

* The Swarajists wanted to contest the council elections and wreck the government from within.
* The Swaraj Party gained impressive successes during the elections to Legislative Councils held in November 1923.
* In the Central Legislative Council Motilal Nehru became the leader of the party whereas in Bengal the party was headed by C.R. Das.

The Swaraj Party did several significant things in the Legislative Council.
* It demanded the setting up of responsible government in India with the necessary changes in the Government of India Act of 1919.
* The party could pass important resolutions against the repressive laws of the government. When a Committee chaired by the Home Member, Alexander Muddiman considered the system of Dyarchy as proper, a resolution was passed against it in the Central Legislative Council.

After the passing away of C.R. Das in June 1925, the Swarj Party started weakening.

#### Simon Commission (1927)
* review commission appointed by the British Government for the review of The Act of 1919
* All its seven members were Englishmen.
* As there was no Indian member in it, the Commission faced a lot of criticism.

The Commission reached Bombay 3 February 1928. Everywhere it was greeted with black flags and the cries of ‘Simon go back’.

At Lahore, the students took out a large anti-Simon Commission demonstration on 30 October 1928 under the leadership of Lala Lajpat Rai. In this demonstration, Lala Lajpat Rai was seriously injured in the police _lathi_ charge and he passed away after one month.

_Features:_
* The report of the Simon Commission was published in May 1930.
* It was stated that the constitutional experiment with Dyarchy was unsuccessful and in its place the report recommended the establishment of autonomous government.
* The Simon Commission’s Report became the basis for enacting the Government of India Act of 1935.

#### Nehru Report (1928)
* In the meanwhile, the Secretary of State, Lord Birkenhead, challenged the Indians to produce a Constitution that would be acceptable to all.
* The challenge was accepted by the Congress, which convened an all party meeting on 28 February 1928.
* A committee consisting of eight was constituted to draw up a blueprint for the future Constitution of India. It was headed by Motilal Nehru.

The Report published by this Committee came to be known as the Nehru Report. The Report favoured:
* Dominion Status as the next immediate step
* Full responsible government at the centre
* Autonomy to the provinces
* Clear cut division of power between the centre and the provinces
* A bicameral legislature at the centre

However, the leader of the Muslim League, Mohammad Ali Jinnah regarded it as detrimental to the interests of the Muslims. Jinnah convened an All India Conference of the Muslims where he drew up a list of Fourteen Points as Muslim League demand.

#### Civil Disobedience Movement (1930-1934)
* The Lahore session of Congress in December 1929 was presided over by Jawaharlal Nehru.
* In this session, the Congress passed the 'Poorna Swaraj' resolution.
* Moreover, as the government failed to accept the Nehru Report, the Congress gave a call to launch the Civil Disobedience Movement.
* The Congress observed January 26, 1930 as the Day of Independence.
* Since then, January 26th had been observed as a day of independence every year.
* The same date later became the Republic Day when the Indian Constitution was enforced in 1950.

___The Dandi March:___
* Gandhi, with a number of his followers, marched to Dandi in Gujarat to break the salt laws.
* On 6th April 1930, Gandhi formally launched the Civil Disobedience Movement by breaking the salt laws.

Mahatma Gandhi laid out the programme of the movement which included:
* making of salt in every village in violation of the existing salt laws
* picketing by women before the shops selling liquor, opium and foreign clothes
* organising the bonfires of foreign clothes
* spinning clothes by using charkha fighting untouchability
* boycotting of schools and colleges by students
* resigning from government jobs by the people
* not to pay taxes to the government

Soon, the movement spread to all parts of the country. Students, workers, farmers and women, all participated in this movement with great enthusiasm.

As a reaction, the British Government arrested important leaders of the Congress and imprisoned them.
