
#### Cabinet Mission (1946)
* After the Second World War, Lord Atlee became the Prime Minister of England.
* On 15 March, 1946 Lord Atlee made a historic announcement in which the right to self-determination and the framing of a Constitution for India were conceded.
* Consequently, three members of the British Cabinet - Pathick Lawrence, Sir Stafford Cripps and A. V. Alexander - were sent to India.

_Provision of The Cabinet Mission:_
* Provision was made for three groups of provinces to possess their separate constitutions.
* The Cabinet Mission also proposed the formation of a Union of India, comprising both the British India and the Princely States.
* The Union would remain in charge of only foreign affairs, defence and communications leaving the residuary powers to be vested in the provinces.

A proposal was envisaged for setting up an Interim Government, which would remain in office till a new government was elected on the basis of the new Constitution framed by the Constituent Assembly. Both the Muslim League and the Congress accepted the plan.

Consequently, elections were held in July 1946 for the formation of a Constituent Assembly. An Interim Government was formed under the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru on 2 September 1946.

#### Mountbatten Plan (1947)

On 20 February l947, Prime Minister Atlee:
* announced in the House of Commons the definite intention of the British Government to transfer power to responsible Indian hands by a date not later than June 1948
* to effect the transference of that power Atlee decided to send Lord Mountbatten as Viceroy to India

Lord Mountbatten came to India in March 1947. The partition of India and the creation of Pakistan appeared inevitable to him.

_Mountbatten Plan:_
* Lord Mountbatten put forth the plan of partition of India on 3 June 1947.
* The Congress and the Muslim League ultimately approved it.

#### Indian Independence Act 1947
The British Government accorded formal approval to the Mountbatten Plan by enacting the Indian Independence Act on 18 July 1947.

The salient features of this Act were:
* The partition of the country into India and Pakistan would come into effect from 15 August 1947.
* The British Government would transfer all powers to these two Dominions.
* A Boundary Commission would demarcate the boundaries of the provinces of the Punjab and Bengal. The 'Radcliff Boundary Commission' drew the boundary line separating India and Pakistan.
* The Act provided for the transfer of power to the Constituent Assemblies of the two Dominions, which will have full authority to frame their respective Constitutions.

Lord Mountbatten was made the first Governor General of Independent India, whereas Mohammad Ali Jinnah became the first Governor General of Pakistan.
