
#### Types of Majority
* Simple majority
    - not less than 50% of the members present and voting
    - Eg. Ordinary bill, Money bill, Budget
* Effective majority
    - not less than 50% of the then members of the house
    - _Effective strength_: number of then members of the house
    - Eg. Removal of speaker of Lok Sabha
* Absolute majority
    - not less than 50% of the total membership of the house
    - For Lok Sabha, this number is 273
* Special majority
    1. 2/3 of the total membership of the house
        * Eg. Impeachment of the president
    2. 2/3 of the members present and voting __and__ Absolute majority of the house
        * Eg. Removal of judges of SC/HCs, Amendment of the constitution

#### Nature of Indian Federal System
* USA is federal, UK is unitary; India is Quasi-federal
* Quasi-federal means 'federation with unitary bias' (less federation, more unitary)
* Supreme Court has declared that federalism is the basic feature of the Indian constitution.
* Why India was given this sort of federal nature, rather than making India completely unitary:
    - to convince the provinces and princely states to join the Union of India
    - for better administration considering the huge size of India

#### Federal characteristics of India
1. Written constitution
2. Division of powers
    - between centre and the states
3. Rigidity of constitution
    - rigid particularly in areas dealing with division of powers
4. Supremacy of constitution
    - constitution binding on centre and the state govts.
5. Authority of the courts (judiciary)
    1. resolve disputes between centre and the states over distribution of powers
    2. power to interpret the constitution and the interpretation binding on centre and the states

#### Amendment of the constitution
* Art. 368 (Procedure and Power of Parliament to amend the constitution)
* Neither the centre nor the states alone can amend the constitution in areas having effect on distribution of powers. There are 5 such areas which are mentioned later.
* In these 5 areas, the amendment of the constitution
    - needs to be passed by the parliament by special majority (2/3 of the members present and voting and Absolute majority of the house)
    - then, at least 50% of the state legislatures (including Delhi and Pondicherry) must also approve it by simple majority
    - then only the proposal will be sent for presidential approval
* In situations other than these 5 areas, the amendment of the constitution under Art. 368
    - can directly be passed at the level of Parliament, and
    - sent for presidential approval

#### 5 areas in constitution having effect on division of powers
1. _Area 1_
    - Art. 54 & 55 (Election of President)
    - Art. 73 & 162 (Extent of executive power of the Union and State)
    - Art. 241 (High Courts for Union territories)
2. _Area 2_
    - Chap 4 of Part 5 [Art. 124-147] (Union Judiciary)
    - Chap 5 of Part 6 [Art. 214-231] (High Courts in the States)
    - Chap 1 of Part 11 [Art. 245-255] (Legislative relations between the Union and States)
3. Schedule 7 (Union list, State list and Concurrent list)
4. Representation of States in Parliament (LS + RS)
5. Art. 368 (Amendment of the constitution)

#### Federal nature of foreign countries
* The USA and Australia are considered to be most federal in nature.
* Below are some of the characteristics of the US federal system:
    - Apart from country's constitution, each state has its own constitution
    - Federal Citizenship as well as State Citizenship
    - Federal Supreme Court as well as State supreme courts
    - National flag as well as State flags
    - National anthem as well as State songs and anthems

#### Unitary characteristics of India
1. States don't have separate constitutions (except J&K)
2. No dual citizenship (concept of Permanent Residency in J&K)
3. Single unified judiciary
4. Under Art. 3, Parliament can change name, area, boundary of a state with or without the consent of the states
5. During emergencies the distribution of powers between centre and states may cease to exist
    - Art. 352 (National emergency)
    - Art. 360 (Financial emergency)
    - Art. 356 (President's Rule)
6. Imbalance between distribution of powers provided to centre and states (Schedule 7)
    - More weightage to centre which has largest no. of subjects (which are more important also)
    - Distribution of power allows centre to collect more revenues
    - Centre (Parliament)'s claim is superior on concurrent list
    - Centre (Parliament) can make laws on even state subjects under 5 extraordinary situations:
        1. Art. 249
            - RS can pass a resolution to do so by special majority in National interest
            - such a law made by Parliament remains in operation for 1 yr at a time, and can be renewed any number of times
        2. Art. 250
            - during National emergency, the Parliament assumes _concurrent_ legislative jurisdiction over state list subjects
        3. Art. 252
            - 2 or more states' legislatures pass a resolution (by simple majority) authorizing Parliament to legislate over state subjects
            - the law remains in operation until it is repealed by Parliament itself
        4. Art. 253 (Legislation for giving effect to international agreements)
        5. Art. 356 (President's Rule)
