
#### The English East India Company
* The English East India Company was  established on 31 December 1600 as per the Royal Charter issued by the Queen of England, Elizabeth I.
* The Company had sent Captain Hawkins to the court of the Mughal Emperor, Jahangir in 1608 to secure permission to establish a “factory” (store house of goods) at Surat. It was turned down initially.
* In 1613, Jahangir issued the _'firman'_ permitting the East India Company to establish its first trading post at __Surat__.

_Agra, Ahmedabad and Broach:_
* Sir Thomas Roe obtained more trading rights and privileges for the East India Company.
* Accordingly, the English set up business centres at Agra, Ahmedabad and Broach.

_Madras:_
* In 1639, Francis Day established the city of Madras and constructed the Fort St. George.

_Bombay:_
* In 1668, the English East India Company leased Bombay from their King, Charles II.

_Calcutta:_
* By the year 1690, Job Charnock, the agent of the East India Company purchased three villages namely, Sutanuti, Govindpur and Kalikatta.
* In course of time, this grew into the city of Calcutta.
* It was fortified by Job Charnock by establishing Fort William.

The factories and trading centres which the English established all along the sea-coast of India were grouped under three presidencies namely Bombay, Madras and Calcutta.

Rise of the East India Company as a political power:
* Battle of Plassey in 1757
* Battle of Buxar in 1764
* Robert Clive (1757–1760) was the first Governor of Fort William under the Company’s rule.
* In 1772, the Company appointed Warren Hastings as the Governor of Fort William.
